initial metastore design (#2715)
treeverse/lakeFS: design/metastore.md

# Next Generation Metastore

### Overview

Deliver manageability of metastore information alongside the object-store data as part of lakeFS.

### Goals

- Metastore entities are versioned: using the same commit and branching abilities that lakeFS provides
- Metastore entities are versioned together with the data: an atomic merge operation should contain both data mutations as well as metastore mutations.

> - Metastore entities are diff-able: can view the changes made to the metadata between commits

Reviewer: `metadata` has multiple meanings, can you be more explicit?

- Maintain some compatibility with existing HMS, or at least a narrow set of its versions and API
- Extend functionality to also support next-generation table formats in addition to hive-style tables (Notably, Iceberg and Delta Lake) - long term goal.

### Non-Goals

- Support storing metadata inside existing Hive Metastore implementations
- Provide any significant change in performance or throughput of metadata operations
- Provide compatibility with other specific versions of Hive or Hive Metastore

### Design Diagram

> [lakeFS Metastore](diagrams/metastore.png)

Reviewer: Embed it in here instead of linking to it.

> In this diagram:

Reviewer 2: Can we direct to the backing S3 store implementation?  This will make some things much easier and faster.

> 1. Spark/Hive/Trino - data and metadata clients

Reviewer: Do any of these impose limitations on the `metastoreEndpoint`? Any other metastore client, open-source or not, that we need to verify?

> 1. lakeFS Metastore Thrift Proxy - act as the client's metastore by implementing the Hive Metastore Thrift protocol

Reviewer: gateway?

> 1. lakeFS Metastore Thrift Proxy - act as the client's metastore by implementing the Hive Metastore Thrift protocol

Reviewer 3: For me it's just "lakeFS Metastore"

1. lakeFS - Include the new following components:
   - Additional operations on OpenAPI that will 
   - Metadata catalog that will wrap Graveler to serve metadata like we do for the object store.

The diagram show how Spark/Hive/Trino connects to lakeFS's metastore proxy (which acts as Hive Metastore).
The request to the metastore proxy will invoke the equivalent operation on lakeFS's OpenAPI.
Inside lakeFS API implementation will use the metastore catalog, that is implemented by Graveler as the storage engine.

### Data Model

> Using Gravler we can implement a Metastore catalog for all the metadata properties.

Reviewer 2: Agreed.  The obvious alternative is to keep the metastore catalog as "normal" files with "special" names inside the repo.  That makes _some_ things much easier (e.g. viewing history, accessing from a client, etc.).  Other things might become harder to do.

Let's explain here why we're adding HMS as more metadata rather than as more data.

There are no advantages that I can see in terms of using Graveler to manage huge files -- I do not believe catalogs can be that big.

The obvious place where storing inside a Graveler is an advantage is *if* merges become trivial.  Then again, when merges are trivial then merging a single structured file should also be quite easy.

Using the same ordered key-value exposed by Graveler we can model the entities used by Hive Metastore:

- Databases
- Tables
- Partitions
- Indices
- Functions
- Columns (TODO: how do we store column statistics?)
- Constraints
- Serdes

> Mapping the above model into our key/value and compare/merge strategy by a table level can be implemented as first step. Compare and merge changes in database/table level, which means that any changes under the table will consider a table modification and the user will handle to resolve a conflcit in case two diffrent nested information would have changed.

Reviewer: I don't understand the `first step` you suggested. Also, what are the possible next steps?

One of the discover items is to select the best way we can model the information in order to have a better way to diff/merge changes in metastore data.  The key format we will use will effect how the underlaying ranges will be split, the cost of lookup of nested information and etc.
In order to keep a reference to a state of the above model, the data we will keep depends on they we store.
For example in case we like to store database information in our key/value storage:

```
db/db1 -> {name, description, locationUri, parameters, privileges, ownerName, ownerType}
db/db2 -> {name, description, locationUri, parameters, privileges, ownerName, ownerType}
...
```

Different keys holds different value format

```
db/db1/table/tbl1 -> {tableName,dbName,owner,createTime,lastAccessTime,retention,sd,partitionKeys,...}
db/db1/table/tbl2 -> {tableName,dbName,owner,createTime,lastAccessTime,retention,sd,partitionKeys,...}
db/db2/table/tbl1 -> {tableName,dbName,owner,createTime,lastAccessTime,retention,sd,partitionKeys,...}
...
```

The data model that Hive Metastore provides enables more than the above. We will implement the missing entities as required by the data tools.

### Thrift API

> Implementing the Hive Metastore 2.3.x will be the starting point of lakeFS's Metastore.

Reviewer 4: Implementing the Hive Metastore 2.3.x **API**

Spark works with Hive Metastore version 2.3.9 (https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/sql-data-sources-hive-tables.html), but can also work with version 3.x.
Trino can work with Hive 2 and 3, while having specific capabilities enabled for version 3.

> Must of the Hive Metastore Thrift interface kept backward compatibility v2.3.x and v3.x interfaces are almost identical, where version 3 adds Catalog and Workload management metadata.

Reviewer: Most?

Code generation should be considered. Having generated bride that will transfer each Thrift API call to our OpenAPI. And/or generate code for each entity described in the Thrift interface can reduce the code in order serialize, map and filter the data model.

Thrift API communicate over a socket, the first step will enable non-secure communication over an additional port. A secure communication can be handled by a external TCP load-balancer first, later the proxy can supply this capability out of the box.

> Hooks - The Thrift interface include a set of API ends with '_environment_context', which enables the caller passing additional information to the hooks. The hooks mechanism in Hive Metastore is a Java interface implementation that the metastore load and calls on specific operations. We will not support this mechanism at first, but we can have a reference implementation of what to expect in case of adding it to our hooks mechanism.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Hooks - The Thrift interface includes a set of API endpoints with the suffix '_environment_context', which allow the caller to pass additional information to the hooks. The hooks mechanism in Hive Metastore is a Java interface implementation that the metastore loads and calls on specific operations. We will not support this mechanism at first, but we can have a reference implementation of what to expect in case of adding it to our hooks mechanism.
```

> Hooks - The Thrift interface include a set of API ends with '_environment_context', which enables the caller passing additional information to the hooks. The hooks mechanism in Hive Metastore is a Java interface implementation that the metastore load and calls on specific operations. We will not support this mechanism at first, but we can have a reference implementation of what to expect in case of adding it to our hooks mechanism.

Reviewer: Can you explain the rational of not supporting that at first (or really any other item which is kept for later)? If there was a discovery that made you realize this shouldn't be implemented first, please elaborate on the findings here. If there wasn't, let's add a discovery item.

### Discovery

> Metastore implementation provides a reference implementation we can test and explore. It still needs to be discovered how to extend functionality to enable versioning.

Reviewer 3: > Metastore implementation provides a reference implementation

Is that the Hive metastore?

Finding out more about the following items will help us evaluate our design options:

1. Passing lakeFS's reference/branch information from the metastore client. Explore ways to pass repository/branch/ref information from the client to our metastore.

> 1. Side by side - very similar to the current work on side-by-side work with lakeFS and the current object-storage, the user like to run the same application with minimum changes, while enabling some of the data to live inside lakeFS. What needs to change or requirements in order to have the same in the metadata level? Do we need to sync information, manage part of the data and enable mapping on the client side? Can we replace the client side implementation? do we need to spin different endpoints to serve different repositories, branches in lakeFS for parts of the metadata? fallback to existing metastore?

Reviewer 3: I think an example is in order here, not sure what it means to have a side-by-side here.

> ... enable mapping on the client side? Can we replace the client side implementation?

Client side of what?

> 1. Data model diff/merge - describe the level of entities we use for diff/merge. The operation we need to support in order to resolve conflict. How it effects our import/export path?

Reviewer: I don't understand how `import/export` are related here.

Author: See it as part of how we handle the data model, but can split it.
In case we choose as part of the data model handle specific entities - how we plan to import and export the data? do we loose part of it when we export back. Different Metastore solutions like Glue can have differences and she need to address them as part of our data model.
Think it will be easier to processes as a different item or part of how the data model looks like?

> 1. Authentication with lakeFS - currently lakeFS secure all access by authenticating each request. What will be with metadata?

Reviewer: Why is this different?

Author: Hive Metastore doesn't provide any authentication mechanism - our API interface does. It means that if we plan to use OpenAPI to provide metastore management we need to address the authorization and authentication in some way. Or guide the user on how to enable that securely.

1. Data model - best way to model the metadata information into Graveler to enable 3-way diff / merge that will work in optimal way. Enable diff and merge with context, for example, when a column is added we need to know on which table and merge can identify two new partitions to the same table without a conflict.

> 

Reviewer 4: Sharing an observation, there are two logical milestones I see here - 
1. lakeFS's Versioned Metastore (LVMS?)
2. Metastore clients integration with LVMS

Given this distinction, the discovery items split as follows: 
### lakeFS's Versioned Metastore
1. Data model diff/merge - describe the level of entities we use for diff/merge.
2. Data model - best way to model the metadata information into Graveler to enable 3-way diff / merge that will work in optimal way.

I think that it will be good to work on the items above in order. The level of entities used for diff/merge will affect how we model the information to optimize these operations. 

### Metastore clients integration with LVMS
1. Passing lakeFS's reference/branch information from the metastore client. Explore ways to pass repository/branch/ref information from the client to our metastore.
2. co-exist with other metastores - explore potential ways to achieve that. 
3. Authentication with lakeFS

IMO 3 is independent of 1 & 2

Reviewer: I don't understand the emphasis we put on `optimising` diff/merge. How many items are there in the context of a table? Few 100s/1000s at best? Lets think about worst-case scenario here and see if we really need to think about optimisation of a merge/diff..

Author: Missed this one - comment about the diff/merge and data model at the end.  Optimizing is not something we need to focus on, just need to think of a data model that will work for us and map the pros and cons in the context of storage and operations we currently support.

@talSofer about the milestones - the first milestone is getting all the known unknowns and decide on the way we like to address the open/discovery items.
I like LMS or lakeMS - will get to naming pretty soon I guess...
Agree we can parallel the client part (although passing ref can be also done by syntax) to the data model and how we going to use lakeFS in implementing our own metastore.
As I see it the authentication we can start simple - do what HMS does - give none and do not open API. But I thought that we already discover what we can pass from the client (branch, ref and etc) so maybe we can use the same technique to pass credentials.
I'll update the metastore-project with the above and add the additional discovery items.

Example of how we can map keys to different entities:

```
db/db1 -> {name, description, locationUri, parameters, privileges, ownerName, ownerType}
db/db2 -> {name, description, locationUri, parameters, privileges, ownerName, ownerType}
db/db1/table/tbl1 -> {tableName,dbName,owner,createTime,lastAccessTime,retention,sd,partitionKeys,...}
db/db1/table/tbl2 -> {tableName,dbName,owner,createTime,lastAccessTime,retention,sd,partitionKeys,...}
db/db2/table/tbl1 -> {tableName,dbName,owner,createTime,lastAccessTime,retention,sd,partitionKeys,...}
...
```

Location - entities location points to the object store location use a global location called warehouse location to store the data.  The location is a path to a directory.
The location can't reference the lakeFS underlying storage (physical address) as it doesn't contain the structure and object names. We can look into integrating with lakeFS's Hadoop FS where mapping object locations under gateway address can be directly access using 'lakefs://' schema.

> The above list of entries are just part of the data model that Hive Metastore provides and the one we assume it is required to work. Supporting the full interface will map the additional entities we will support with one exception we like to discover which is statistics to verify if the same storage should include the statistics, do we need to provide diff/merge the same way and can we update statistics for committed metastore information.

Reviewer: Could you clarify the statistics part? Not really clear..

### Thrift API

Implementing the Hive Metastore 2.3.x API will be the starting point of lakeFS Metastore. The must of the Thrift interface of the metastore is CRUD operation on the data model (entities listed above)
Spark works with Hive Metastore version 2.3.9 (https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/sql-data-sources-hive-tables.html), but can also work with version 3.x.
Trino can work with Hive 2 and 3, while having specific capabilities enabled for version 3.

> Must of the Hive Metastore Thrift interface kept backward compatibility. The v2.3.x and v3.x interfaces are almost identical, where version 3 adds Catalog and Workload management metadata.

Reviewer: Should we support that additional metadata?

> Implementing Thrift interface include code generation (stub/skeleton), as part of the server side we implement, we should consider using additional code generation or dynamic code that will enable us implement the proxy and pass the request to the lakeFS OpenAPI implementation. It can reduce the work needed and prevent bugs.

Reviewer: Not sure what's the `additional code generation or dynamic code` purpose is, given that the Thrift interface is generated to begin with..

Hooks - The Thrift interface includes a set of API endpoints with the suffix '_environment_context', which allow the caller to pass additional information to the hooks. The hooks mechanism in Hive Metastore is a Java interface implementation that the metastore loads and calls on specific operations. We will not support this mechanism at first, but we can have a reference implementation of what to expect in case of adding it to our hooks mechanism

### Discovery

Hive Metastore implementation provides a reference implementation we can test and explore. It still needs to be discovered how to extend functionality to enable versioning.

> Finding out more about the following items will help us evaluate our design options:

Reviewer: One more items I can think of:
1. Importing/Exporting from the metastore

> 1. lakeFS metastore implementation over lakeFS or as part of lakeFS. Manage Agreed. Manage the metadata over lakeFS or over a new Graveler based catalog. What is the relationship between lakeFS repository and the metastore 1:1, 1:m or n:m.

Reviewer: Could you clarify `Manage Agreed`?

### Design Diagram

![lakeFS Metastore](diagrams/metastore.png)

In this diagram:
1. Spark/Hive/Trino - data and metadata clients (connects using Thrift endpoint)
1. lakeFS Metastore Thrift Proxy - acts as the client's metastore by implementing the Hive Metastore Thrift protocol
1. lakeFS - Includes the metatore implementation by:

>    - Additional operations on OpenAPI that will serve the metastore information and operations like we have for objects.

Reviewer 2: This is only if we don't implement _on top of_ lakeFS, right?  I think we can get by with implementing a metastore as an external lakeFS client; maybe it will require some pluggable logic inside merges and/or commits, but if that's the sort of thing that we need then these are possibly required OpenAPI _general_ operations rather than _HMS-specific_ ones.

>    - Metadata catalog that will use Graveler and store metastore information.

Reviewer 2: Again, I would much have the metastore on top of lakeFS rather than inside it.  The metastore data are really quite tiny, and I am not sure why we would need to go full Graveler on them, rather than just keeping a JSON-equivalent structure inside a file.
